All right.
So in the last lesson, we implemented the delete capability, and so that just leaves one more basic
bit of functionality to complete out our crud operations, and that is the ability to update.
OK, so let's just jump right in here and get this done.
Now there are a lot of ways that you could go about implementing any of these operations that we've
been doing.
And I don't want you to have the impression that the way that I'm showing you here is the only way we
could have done it in a lot of different ways.
And along those lines, when we implement the edit an update capability here, this is one that I don't
know that what I'm going to show you is the way that I would really do this if I were willing to spend
more time on it.
But I'm trying to weigh the expediency of just showing you an overview of how you can do basic crud
applications in the UI without having to introduce 15 million additional technologies, which I'm already
hitting you with timely for the for the view templating and spring MVC and the controller and HTML and
bootstrap.
And that's a lot already.
And so I kind of drew the line at having to also introduce you to JavaScript, although some of you
may already know JavaScript, but I want to try to avoid that for now, at least.
So that decision is coloring how I am going about implementing a lot of this functionality just so you
know.
OK, so having said all of that, what I'm envisioning here is in order to implement the ability to
edit, I think I want to reuse some of the functionality that's already here, namely, the checkbox
is here.
So what I'm envisioning is that if you wanted to edit one of these records, you would select it and
then we will add an additional button down here.
So like an action button for edit.
OK.
So you would select a row, click the edit button and then that would bring up all the details for that
particular record down here.
And then you could make changes to it and then and then save.
OK.
That's what I'm envisioning now.
That's not ideal or perfect.
If any of you happen to be UI UX experts UI stands for user interface, UX stands for user experience.
So there are people who are experts at user experience who kind of study what is the best way to implement
functionality in a page so that users will find it intuitive to do.
And some UI UX experts might not like the fact that I'm going to use checkboxes, which technically
allow you to select multiple items to be used for selecting Edit.
Because obviously when we're editing, we're not editing multiple records at the same time.
Typically, we're really just editing one at a time, though I can think of a reason why you might want
to do that.
But but typically you'd be doing one at a time.
And so it could be argued that using checkboxes to select one first and then having to click edit it
may not be the greatest usability, and I wouldn't even disagree with that.
But again, I'm just trying to keep things sort of simple and piggyback off of what we've already done
before.
OK, so all right, so let's jump in here.
So I think the first thing I want to do is add an additional button.
So let's jump over to the template here and let's find our existing delete button.
And I think what I want to start off doing is just copying that someone to duplicate that like so and
I think I want delete to be the last button because that's kind of that's a dangerous button.
So maybe we want to keep that out of the way, which is why I made it red.
So I'm going to pick this first one here and let's change its name to edit and we'll leave the true
there.
And now we'll change this.
So this style right here, this class is what is controlling the color and decoration of the button.
So it's button danger.
So if we jump over here to our list of button options here, I think maybe just using the primary for
this edit button might be OK, perhaps.
So that is BTN primary.
In fact, I can just select that and copy it and then come over here.
I didn't mean to overwrite that, but paste that right there, OK?
And so then if we jump back over here and then we'll change the actual text on this to edit, and let's
refresh the page.
OK, cool.
So, yeah, now we've got an edit button and a delete button.
I wouldn't mind having a little more space between these two.
And we should be able to do that with something like a let's see margin.
And because it's the the right end or, you know, you've got like the beginning, which is the left
and then you've got the right side of the button, which is considered the end.
So m e four end, and then maybe we'll use a number of two here.
OK.
And let's refresh and see how that looks.
Yeah, that's fine.
OK.
So we've got our edit button now.
And you remember that the name and value bits here are only being utilized so that back in the controller,
we can differentiate which button was actually pressed, that's what those are going to be used for.
OK, so let's jump over to the controller now and see what we need to do here.
Now, I think what we're pretty much going to be doing is almost exactly what we did in delete.
So much so that maybe we can start off by just copying this, the delete method and paste that there
and then just start making some changes.
So first thing maybe is to change the method name.
So this will be for editing.
And I guess we can just simplistically simplistically call it edit person.
All right.
And then we'll want to change this value here to add it so that way, this method only gets called if
the edit button was pressed.
And we're still going to receive our selections because we're reusing the check boxes there, and we
even probably want this conditional still.
And so now what?
What's the thing that we might want to do differently, though?
I think what we'll want to do differently here is that when someone selects one of these check boxes
and clicks edit, maybe we want to go out to the database and just retrieve the first selection.
So if they happen to have selected multiple check boxes, maybe we're going to ignore all but the very
first one.
First of all, maybe that's just how we're going to make this work and we're going to go out to the
database and reach RE- retrieve the very first record that was selected.
And then what we can do?
Do you remember how we were making it so that data was showing up in this form down here?
Do you remember how we were doing that?
Let's see here.
So in the controller here, you may recall that we've got this method here get person, which is automatically
being bound to the model with a name of all lowercase person.
OK, so that's kind of like the default behavior.
Whenever we have this form, you get a new empty person, OK, so you get empty fields here.
OK, so any person object that we bind to the model with the name person, all lowercase will show up
here.
And so that means that if we want to just have all of these fields show up down here when someone clicks
edit, all we really need to do is just grab that person from the database, put them into the model
and then return back to this page.
And then all of those fields will already be there, OK?
Does that make sense?
So.
So that's what we're going to do.
So first thing, let's go ahead and grab the selected person from the database.
And so we should be able to do that by simply doing a let's see find by ID.
OK, so there's our find by ID, and now we need to get their I.D. the actual ID of the first selection.
OK, now this selections object here, remember, is an optional.
So this does get that we're doing right here is simply taking the list out of the optional OK, so this
would result in a list of longs.
All right.
And then from there we could do another get.
But now this is calling get on the list.
OK.
And then if we want the first item in that list, that would just be zero.
OK, so that might look a little confusing.
So here's an optional get.
Here's a list.
Here's the first item in the list OK, which would be the long zero.
And then we're saying, go find the person with whatever that ID is.
In this case, it would be one if that was the checkbox that we had selected.
OK?
And so this method would return with a person object and then we can capture that person object.
Like so now notice it's actually returning an optional of a person because it's possible that the ID
that we passed in is not a legitimate I.D. and so they're giving us back an optional of a person.
OK, and then we can simply bind that person to the model.
Now we don't have access to the model here yet, but we can get that really easily if we simply refer
to the model like so and this is how we actually started off with our very first.
I think it was the save method.
So I'm going to import this.
OK, so we were letting spring MVC call our handler method and spring in D.C. will see that we have
a parameter of type model.
And so spring then DC will pass the model, which is what it maintains anyway.
It'll pass that into this method.
And then from here we can call model that add attribute and then we'll set that attribute to person
and then pass in the person like.
So now the last thing we want to do, though, is we don't actually want to do this redirect here.
OK, we don't want that because if we do this redirect, we actually lose the person that we are binding
to the model.
And let me make sure you understand why that is.
When we do a redirect, we are giving a command to the browser to perform a get request on the people
resource, OK?
And so what that would result in is the browser will make a request to people which would ultimately
result in the browser calling the show people page.
OK, now everything that is getting bound to the model from these to model attribute methods here,
that would all still happen.
But.
This person that we're binding to the model down here when we click the edit button that would get lost.
OK, so we don't actually want to do a redirect in this particular case.
We just want to return back to this page with the model intact.
OK, so we don't want to redirect in this particular case.
And let me just remind you now the only point of this is to populate this form with whatever person
we selected.
OK.
And then when we click Save, that's just going to go back to our existing save method.
OK, so that save is going to do what it has already been doing.
All right.
So that's the point of this.
So let's refresh everything and see where we are so far.
OK, so let's select this second person here and click Edit and see.
OK, so yeah, that looks like it works.
We got person to Smith.
Now we've got that problem with the with the date field, and I do know what the solution is and we
are going to have to actually implement something there.
I was hoping to avoid it, but now that we're doing edit, I can't avoid it any longer.
But but it's kind of easy to to solve.
All right.
And then there's the address.
Now notice we're not seeing the address here because of the response of trickery that we implemented
earlier.
So if I pull this out, though, then we'll see that person's email address to Smith, right?
So there's that.
All right.
And then there's the amount of money.
So now let's see what happens, though, if we make a change in here, OK, so let's change his salary
to something else.
So let's do like $9000, OK?
Let's see what happens here.
Click Return or hit return, by the way.
Hitting return that will trigger the save person button action.
OK, since this form is currently active, hitting enter causes this form to submit itself.
OK, that's how that works.
Oh, OK.
And our validation tripped us up because I didn't re-enter a birth date.
All right.
So I will use the same birth date that's already there for now.
And so this is another reason why we really have to make sure that we do fix that and we will and just
shortly here.
All right.
So return.
Ooh, look at that.
So it didn't update, it actually made a copy of that person.
And now we've said we've got the same guy, essentially with the same first and last name and date of
birth and all of that.
And the only thing that's different is the salary.
So why did that happen?
Do you want to take a guess?
OK, so here's what happened when we selected person to Smith with idea of two and clicked edit, we
retrieved that person object from the database and we added him to the model and then we came back to
this page and filled out this form.
OK, so that all worked perfectly well.
And then we clicked Save, which resulted in coming down to the saved person method with this person
filled in, however, and this is key.
This person object that got sent back from this form did not have an I.D. and the reason it didn't have
an ID is because we don't have an ID filled here, so we're not capturing the ad. So in other words,
when we selected this guy for Edit and we clicked the edit button.
And then we populated this form, we lost his ID because we're not we're not tracking his ID down here.
So this person that got posted back into the controller here had all of these fields filled out, but
the ID was null and with spring data slash JP's slash hibernate when an entity and an entity is just
an object that is meant to be used with the database.
Essentially, when an entity doesn't have an ID or an ID is null by default, that tells Hibernate to
go ahead and just save that entity.
Brand new, OK?
However, if the entity has an existing ID already, then Hibernate understands that it should not create
a new record.
It should not perform an insert, but instead it should perform an update.
So Hibernate is smart enough to understand that depending on that primary key filled in there or that
ID property, that helps it to know whether or not it's doing an insert in sequel or an update.
OK.
And so the key to fixing this little issue here is that we actually need the ID.
Now here's the problem, though we don't want our users to be able to edit that ID because if they change
that ID, that is the same thing essentially as just creating a brand new record.
Or it could be even worse.
You might be overwriting other records that already exist in the database, so you don't want that.
So we need to we need to.
We need to capture that ID when we're populating this form so that it can be sent back when we're posting
slash saving the person, but we don't want that ID to be editable.
OK.
Does that make sense?
So luckily, it's HTML has a great solution for exactly this type of issue.
So let's jump over to our form.
All right, so here's our form, and here are all of our fields, right, so there's the first name,
last name, date of birth, email, salary, et cetera, et cetera.
So luckily, what we can do here is we can introduce another input field for the ID.
However, we can make it what they call hidden.
We can make it hidden.
And that will allow us to capture the data, but not show it or make it editable anywhere on the screen.
OK.
So that's that's an easy way that we can solve this particular issue.
So what we will do here is I'm simply going to introduce this field just like this.
The tape will be hidden.
Like so so that will just tell the browser, don't even display this field, it's just kind of behind
the scenes to hold on to that idea.
OK.
And for that reason, I'm not wrapping it in divs with labels and all that stuff either, because these
divs and labels and stuff are really here for cosmetic purposes to specify the layout of this field,
right?
But we don't even want this field to be visible, and therefore we don't need the dibs and all of that
stuff either.
We just need this field to just be behind the scenes somewhere hidden, literally hidden.
OK, so we need that.
We won't need the class because again, class definitions are for styling and making things look a certain
way, and we don't need any of that either.
OK.
And so then the next thing that we need, we don't even need this ID field here, which, by the way,
is mostly here actually just to make the editor happy, really, because this colon field attribute
from time will actually result in the regeneration of an ID anyway.
OK.
So we will do colon field equals star I.D. like so.
And we don't need the error class either, because again, that's for cosmetic purposes when you have
an error.
So we won't need that.
So I think this is all we need.
All right.
So let's refresh the page.
OK, so there's that.
And let's delete this erroneously added records, so will delete that.
OK, so that's gone.
And now let's select that record again, the second one with 4500 salary for edit.
All right, there we go.
So let's look behind the scenes of this HTML page now so we can do that so we can do that in a in a
couple of ways.
I can open up the dev tools and go to elements.
And I could just kind of search like maybe the edit button here, because I know that I added that hidden
field somewhere, and if I scroll down here to the bottom, I could select this little button here,
and that button allows me to zoom in on elements on the page.
So if I click that and now it's kind of primed, and then I select somewhere where I know close to where
that hidden field should be.
Like this last button here, I'm going to select that.
And then what happens now is that at this element's area here zooms in on the HTML for that button right
there, OK?
And then right above it, though, is my hidden field with ID of ID and name of ID and value of two.
OK, so and I probably should have shown you this before, but just to make it clear, so this h colon
field is no longer showing up here because it kind of did its job and then it got itself out of the
way.
OK, so this field became an I.D. equals ID attribute and a name equals ID and a value.
This one filled rendered all three of those attributes, and then it removed itself from the final version
of the HTML.
And that's why Time-Life is called a templating engine.
OK?
These are template commands that will result in other H.M. being rendered to the browser.
OK.
All right.
So now we've got that number two, which is what we needed there.
OK.
And so now if I change this salary to 9000 like so l, I got to set this date of birth again.
We'll fix that right next for four.
I don't remember what I had there before, but that's fine.
And then hit read well, let me let me close down the dev tools now, OK, and then I will hit return.
Look at that.
Now we've still got only two records, and the second record now has a salary of nine thousand OK.
So we just needed to capture that ID value and then pass it back to the controller when we are saving
those changes.
So that hibernate would know this isn't a new person with a with a null ID.
This is an existing person with an existing ID.
And therefore we're just doing a an update in the database.
And you know what?
I wish I had remembered to keep our eye on the on the hibernate.
But actually, here it is.
In fact.
Yeah, you can see it right here.
So there's the update that was just executed for us.
That's it.
And then we did a redirect back to the main page again, where hibernate then selected all of the people
to repopulate this table.
OK, so there you can see what's actually happening.
All right.
So now what to do about the date?
Well, the issue here, the reason why this date filled, never populates properly is because of our
form matters.
All right.
So let me remind you of the formatter that we implemented.
We have a formatter here for local dates, right?
Right there.
Specifically, the print method of this formatter, so we decided to customize the display of our local
data so that we would have this nice month written out, followed by a two digit day and then the year
up here in the table.
All right.
And what's happening, though, is when we change the text format of a date to this format, the browser
no longer knows how to pass this so that it can display the date properly, and that's what's happening
here.
So unfortunately, if we want this guy to work as far as I know, at least as far as I know, if we
want this guy to work, we need to put the date format back into this ISO local date format.
That's what's needed.
OK, so here's what we're going to do.
We will go ahead and change this to use the ISO local data.
And in fact, if I recall correctly, I don't I don't even know that we would even need the date, time
format or anymore, because I think the ISO local date was the default that we were getting anyway.
Let's let's let's try that real quick, actually.
Let me confirm that.
So I'm just going to comment about the component there so that this formatter won't get picked up by
spring anymore, and therefore there will be no automated formatting of local dates.
OK, so I'm just getting rid of that and then I'm going to restart or refresh.
All right.
So there are the dates that we're getting now.
So that's the format that we're getting.
And let's just see what we what we get, if I say, to edit one of these fields now.
OK, so yeah, that actually still doesn't work.
That's not the format that it needed to be.
Yeah.
So we do need the.
We do need the ISO local date.
OK, so I just wanted to test that out real quick.
All right.
So we will re-enable this.
Formatter.
And then what we will do is instead of using this custom pattern here like we were, we will replace
that with.
ISO local date.
Like so.
And that means now that I can just refer to this date time format, for instance, here.
And that is also the instance that we're already referring to down here, OK?
So remember, this print method is where we take our dates that are in our person in this case and then
we convert them into a string for display purposes.
And then this past method is where we go from posting a date to then getting it back in to the person
class.
OK?
The instance of the person class.
All right.
So let's refresh again.
All right, yes, so.
So there we go.
So now the default format is four digit year and then the month and then the day.
And now look at that now.
The date of birth field here populates properly, so this guy wasn't happy.
However, now.
I don't like that.
I want my dates the way that I want them, OK?
The way that we started off with all of this.
So how can I get around this issue?
Well, I did mention this before, but I didn't show it before, and now I will.
We actually can format these dates using another technique and that is using time length itself.
OK.
So if we jump back over to our template now and let me close down that console stuff there and we find
our table up here at the top and we go to this date of birth field here, right?
So we actually can just format this date of birth using functions that are provided by Time-Life.
However, it's going to be a little bit involved in what we have to do.
So let me take you down the road so that you'll understand first.
So we'll jump back over to the timely documentation here, and we will go to the generic documentation,
not the one for spring, because what we're about to do now with formatting a date has nothing specifically
to do with spring right now.
All right.
So we'll jump into their generic documentation and then down here at the very bottom where they've got
all their methods and functions and stuff, we'll go down here to date.
So I'm in the Appendix B expression utility objects and we'll go down here to dates.
And I showed you this briefly once upon a time.
And so they've got a method, right?
Which one is this one right here?
Dates dot format.
And then you can pass in a format, OK?
So we've got that.
Now I'm going to cut to the chase in the interest of time, though, and tell you that this actually
won't work for us.
And the problem is that it is the right thing to do mostly.
But it won't work for us.
And the reason it won't work is because this function, this method, if you will, dates.
That format only understands the old style Java date.
So if you'll recall back in the daytime, in the daytime lessons that I taught, I didn't spend a whole
lot of time on the old style date and time and calendar API because you, for the most part, should
try to avoid that.
If you're writing new code, it's just not as good and it's not as consistent as the current modern
date time API where we're using everything that you've been seeing us use local dates in zone date times
and all of that stuff.
However, this library by default does not understand local dates and things of that sort.
And so if we were to try to use this method, as is, our program would blow up because it would say,
I don't know how to format a local date now.
Happily, there is an extension to time leaf that does know how to handle what are called Java, a date
time API.
And so we need to incorporate that extension as a library into our application.
And then we will be able to basically do this with one minor change.
OK?
So let me show you how to do that, and I'm sorry that you got to go through that, but that's just
how it works.
OK.
So first thing we'll do, we're going to we're going to import a new dependency because this is an additional
library that we need to import into our project.
And the way we can do that is to go to Gradle.
So I will do a commando and type in Gradle, and I want to search for files, not classes, and I want
the wizard at the build that Gradle file.
There it is.
OK, so here I am at the build that Gradle file now.
Just for a moment here, I'm going to switch out of presentation mode so that I can use MAVEN to search
for the Gradle dependency that we need here.
So let me switch out a presentation for a moment here, and then I will do a command in to add an additional
Gradle dependency.
And I think again, I always forget on Windows and Linux, I think it's a control insert.
You can try that.
Add dependency.
All right.
And then up here, I'm going to search for my dependency, so I'm going to search for time leaf and
also Java eight, because I happen to know that those are some of the key words that are in the dependency
that I'm looking for.
And then I will scroll down a little bit.
And there it is, timely extras, Java, eight time, that is the dependency that I want.
And by default, this intelligent utility for adding additional dependencies and everything will typically
display the most recent stable release.
OK.
So all I need to do now is just click, add and watch up here.
When I click Add, that line will be added.
There it is, right there.
OK.
And then I can get rid of that.
And now I can switch back into presentation mode so that you can see what I'm doing more easily without
me having to do a bunch of editing after the fact to zoom in and zoom out and all of that.
It's a lot of work.
All right, there we go.
Now I need to actually trigger Gradle, though, to pull this dependency in.
And so to do that, I can come over here to the Gradle tab and select that and then I can click this
little refresh thing here.
And so that is triggering Gradle to see that I've added a new dependency and then download that dependency
if I didn't already have it.
All right.
So now I've got that dependency here.
So the next step now I want you to kind of understand how you configured some of this out for yourself,
by the way.
So if you actually come over here and just copy like maybe the Java eight time word there and then open
up a browser and you Google time leave space and then that dependency there and maybe documentation.
Like so now I happen to know that it's not either of these first two links, but it is in this GitHub
link here.
So if you click on that.
You'll get to see the very, very tiny little bit of documentation that does exist for this.
And there's one key thing that you need to be aware of, and that's why I'm showing you this.
So down here it says this module adds a temporal object similar to the dates or calendars one in the
standard dialect.
So what they're saying is if we go back over to timely documentation here, the way that Time-Life says
you can do this, this date formatting is by embedding.
Let me zoom in a bit is by embedding.
Something like this.
OK, so this is an object, and this is a method on that object, so you access that object by using
this hashtag dates.
So if you want to do these same kinds of things, but for Java, eight date time API instead of doing
hashtag dates.
You would instead do.
Hashtag Temporal.
OK, so that's the main difference, OK?
That might not have been super obvious to you, and that's why I wanted to make sure that I pointed
that out and they even show some examples right down here, in fact, which actually looks exactly like
what's over here, except instead of dates, it says Temporal.
All right.
OK, so let's jump back over to the browser now and then over here.
Let's jump back over into the template people that HTML.
And so now all we need to do is modify this.
Actually, I guess I should have left either either of these open.
So the version that we really want.
Is this one right here?
I'll zoom in a bit.
Timberwolves dot format where we pass in a temple, which is our date filled, and then we can pass
in a format string just like what we've been using all along, pretty much.
OK, so down here where we're printing out the date of birth.
Now we won't need the double curly braces anymore because now we're not letting the formatter from spring
do any formatting for us.
Okay, we're going to do the formatting now using Time-Life.
OK, so I'm going to get rid of all of that and now I'm going to basically just copy what I see here
more or less.
So they've got a hashtag temporal starved format, and then they refer to the date time object.
That's what this word temporal means.
So hours would be person didio be followed by a comma space.
You don't need that space, but I'm putting in there and then a single tick, and I'm just going to
put both of the text there together.
And I'm also going to put this closing parentheses so that I won't forget them.
All right.
And then inside of here, I will do my formatting.
So the format string that we were using before was for capital M's meaning we want the the month spelled
out.
Followed by two digit de comma and then four digit year.
OK, so that's what we were doing before.
All right.
So let's come back over here and let's see if that's enough.
So I will restart slash refresh.
A. And look at that.
So we're back in business now, so we've got our date formatted nicely up here.
And we're parsing things properly down here, which is exactly what we wanted.
OK, so sorry that that was a little bit of a long way around just to get to that little bit of functionality,
but sometimes that's just what you've got to do.
All right.
So let's see here.
Let's add a few more records, I suppose.
So let me finish editing this record.
So let's change this amount again.
Maybe we'll make it one hundred thousand one hundred to three.
Like, so enter.
OK, so we've got 100 grand now.
And then let's add a new person.
Jerry Seinfeld, I don't know when Jerry Seinfeld was born.
Hey, Google, when was Jerry Seinfeld born?
Jerry Seinfeld was born on April 20, 1954.
April 29, 1954.
Wow, he's kind of up there in age.
A little bit, huh?
All right.
And Jay Seinfeld at NBC dot com.
OK.
And let's say he has a salary of two one two three four five six $2 million.
All right.
So let's add him.
So there's Jerry.
All right.
And now let's edit Jerry Seinfeld.
So we'll select him and click Edit, all right, and so now all of our fields populated, including
the date of birth now properly, and let's say that now he is not no longer with NBC and now he's at
Curb Your Enthusiasm or something.
Seinfeld at Curb dot com.
And now his salary is whatever three million one two three four five six and return.
And very good.
So that updated properly and well, let's check that email address.
Yes.
So the email address is at curb now, so.
There we have it.
So now we've got the ability to add, delete, edit and list out everybody there.
Now we could do a few other tweaks, perhaps like if we selected one of these people to edit them like
this and then we changed our minds.
So, you know, you could have like a cancel button there.
Maybe I'd have that button just result in a redirect back to this page again, that would clear everything
out right there.
Right?
So that would be kind of an easy way to do that.
But yeah, there you have it.
We have now implemented a very typical crud application, and we've encountered a lot of the types of
issues that you would really encounter when doing this type of work.
OK, now I think I will go ahead and teach a few more techniques along these lines before we close out
this section.
But this is covering a lot of the core types of scenarios that you might be likely to encounter with
this type of web application development.
OK?
So in the next lesson, we'll take a look at a few of the remaining techniques that I want to share
with you.
OK, so I'll see you in the next one.